Good day I've Norman Wildberger today we're going
to start trying to extend arithmetic from the
rational number setting which is very familiar to
a slightly larger framework which includes some
new object or perhaps objects that play the role
of infinity in some sense and of course since this
is a foundational series we want to lay things out
in such a way that it's completely cut and dried
so that there's no philosophizing necessary at all
and so that the meaning is completely clear of all
the terms that we're using so this is motivated by
what we've been doing in terms of on sequences we
were talking about on sequences generated by
rational poly numbers a probably number over
another poly number gives us a rational poly
number and associated to such a thing as an
on sequence which we usually write in this way
here and if we write it as 1 plus n over 3 minus
n then we can associate to it sequence of numbers
obtained by substituting N equals 1 and N equals
2 and then n equals 3 and then N equals 4 and so
on and in this case 1 & 2 is not problematic at
all but when n is 3 we can see that we're getting
4 over 0 and that's a new kind of phenomenon and
we've decided to incorporate that with this new
symbol infinity sort of sideways 8 or 11 escape
so here this symbol is a new symbol representing
what option now is an illegal fraction the
fraction 4 over 0 so our natural question is
can we meaningfully and precisely extend the
arithmetic of the rational numbers to include
a symbol like infinity is it possible to define
2/3 plus infinity or minus 3 times infinity or in
plus infinity or infinity divided by infinity and
so on so that's where we're aiming in today's
video so one approach to this is to do it in
stages reflecting the natural order that we use to
set up our arithmetic in the first place starting
from natural numbers to integers and then to
rational numbers or perhaps through fractions
so the natural numbers the numbers 1 2 3 and so
on support the basic operations of addition and
multiplication and it's actually not hard at
all to augment that system say tune at with
infinity above here this sort of going to be our
new type meaning that we're going to augment the
natural number system by allowing one more symbol
this symbol infinity and I emphasize again that
this is nothing but a symbol a type of graphical
object and it has no prior meaning even though we
give it the term infinity that's only for really
historical reasons so the question is how can we
extend the operations and it's pretty clear what
to do we're going to define n plus infinity to be
infinity for any natural number N or commutatively
infinity plus n is also infinity and times
infinity or infinity times n will also be infinity
and when we add infinity to itself we're going
to get infinity and when we multiply infinity by
itself we're gonna get infinity so basically any
operation involving infinity outputs infinity this
is a reasonable and consistent framework for doing
arithmetic which extends the usual natural number
system so a good exercise for you is to check that
the commutative associative and distributive
laws still hold in this extended number system
not infinity well a natural question is why might
we do this does augmenting the natural numbers by
adding infinity actually have any meaning or use
all right so there's a couple of ways of thinking
about this kind of infinite object one is that
it might refer to a number that's so big that
it overwhelms or exceeds any storage device that
we have if we're working with a system based on
some physical computer and we have to deal with
a number that's so big that it doesn't fit on our
computer well in some sense we can't then address
that number we have to give it some special status
that's not unreasonable to to call it something
like in infinity on a more philosophical note
when could also maybe think about you know what
happens if in principle we conjure up larger and
larger and larger numbers occupying more and
more and more space to write down gigabytes
terabytes hard drives the size of a galaxy hard
drive the size of the universe well in principle
there ought to be natural numbers that are that
big and once we get numbers that are bigger than
that they become effectively almost invisible to
us we can no longer access them in any reasonable
way and it's probably not unreasonable to
ascribe to them some number like infinity so
this is at least one way of enlarging our number
system alright so we've added infinity to the
natural numbers how about adding infinity to the
integers so one approach to that is to mimic the
construction of going from the natural numbers
to the integers described in math foundations
12 to go from these new augmented natural numbers
not infinity to say int infinity so I don't leave
this as an exercise for you to play around with
see if you can make something happen that makes
sense but a little bit of a warning don't expect
that all the laws are exactly necessarily going
to work subtraction might be a little bit tricky
to deal with it's a new operation dealing in the
integers that we have to worry about but I'm not
going to spend much time on this because my main
thrust is actually in a different direction I want
to talk about extending rational number arithmetic
to infinity that's actually the application that
has the most application to calculus and that's
what we're going to be talking about so that's our
main goal is to extend rational number arithmetic
from the rational numbers to well we might call
a rat infinity where we've augmented the rational
numbers and we're gonna introduce a new symbol
infinity which is going to be written 1 over 0
and we'll also see that we're going to have need
of another symbol which we'll call star which is
0 over 0 so we're going to try to set something
like this up and these are two objects that are
necessarily going to figure in this story and
I know that you've all been taught and learned
from an early age that 1 over 0 doesn't make
sense and 0 over 0 doesn't make sense of course
that's in standard arithmetic so what we want to
do is we want to be able to enlarge the framework
completely consistently and clearly so that we
extend our meaning to these new symbols and I
remind you this is not so much different from
what we've done when we started going from natural
numbers to integers we introduced negative numbers
which historically were very problematic but we
were able to introduce them very systematically
just based on natural numbers including this new
notion of zero which was a bit of a stumbling
block for many civilizations effectively to do
zero and then to go to rational numbers we again
extended our arithmetic by doing something that
formerly was not possible in the integers you
can't do by two by three but then you introduce
some some symbols some new framework in which two
is divisible by three all right so it's something
like that we're now formally you couldn't divide
one by zero that was not allowed now we're trying
to think of a larger framework in which this might
make sense that's our goal so of course this is a
favorite subject for amateur mathematicians and
people who are sort of philosophically inclined
to try to create number systems where there's
a division by zero allowed and every so often
someone comes up with a framework for doing
this in fact I think just a little while ago
the BBC had a program about a mathematician in
England who who was teaching his students how
to divide by zero and the program presented
this as something of a novelty but in fact
this idea has been around for a long time it's
been around not perhaps in an arithmetic 'el
framework so much as in a geometrical framework ok
so if you know some projective geometry then the
idea of dividing by zero is a very natural one
geometrically so we are going to be guided and
motivated by projective geometry and by anchoring
our arithmetic to geometry this somehow ensures
that it's going to be stable and that it's going
to be somehow natural it's a very good thing to
do to try to connect arithmetic with geometry
so in some sense this idea that I'm going to
present to you now probably goes back in some
form or another you know a couple hundred years
at least ok so let me remind you of the plane and
with x and y coordinates and i'm I've drawn sort
of coordinate lines here because I'm particularly
interested in the integral points points like 2
3 or 4 6 which actually lie on the sections
or meats of these coordinate lines so both
coordinates having integer values okay so let
me remind you that one possible interpretation
of rational numbers was as follows we could think
of the rational number line as actually the line
y equals 1 in this plane and that interpretation
connects rational numbers with lines through the
origin so for example the rational number 2
over 3 which of course is the same as 4 over
6 or minus 2 over minus 3 or minus 4 over minus 6
can be associated with this line on this line the
error there are these integral points there's
2 comma 3 there is 4 6 there's minus 2 minus 3
there's minus 4 minus 6 these points correspond
in an obvious way to those fractions 2 over 3 4
over 6 minus 2 over minus 3 and so on now where
this line meets the line y equals 1 is where you
scale things so that the y coordinate becomes
1 so you've multiplied a point say that one
there so that its y-coordinate is 1 in this
case you would have had 2/3 and that means
that its x-coordinate is now 2/3 so this point
right here where this line meets the y equals
1 line is the point that you might usually
call 2/3 in a sort of primary school look at
the rational numbers so the rational number 2/3
which is sitting right there on the number line
can also be thought of in terms of this line
through the origin and can also be associated
with this point or maybe this point or maybe
the or maybe this point many other multiples
as another example say the rational number minus
5/3 corresponds to the point minus 5/3 over here
and but five minus three written that way would
correspond to the point five minus three or
maybe minus ten six which would be further in that
direction or minus 15 and nine which would even be
further in that direction and so on and this line
then that's associated to this rational number
meets the number line y equals one at this point
right here and that is indeed minus 5/3 out in
other words the x coordinate really is minus 5/3
so what we have here is a situation where we're
thinking about the rational numbers as manifested
in a two dimensional sense and of course if you've
watched the last few videos in this series about
five or six videos ago I we were talking about the
deep structure of the rational numbers we talked
about the stern broco tree we talked about sort of
two-dimensional representation of rational numbers
with wedges involved so if you haven't watched
those videos please have a look to reinforce
the idea that it might be useful to think about
rational numbers in a two dimensional sense okay
so what we do this when we take this point of view
this projective point of view and by the way if
you're interested in projective geometry you can
have a look at the wild trig series videos 31 to
40 roughly deal with projective geometry and also
my math history 8 video talks about the history
of projective geometry that would be very useful
in understanding some basics about the subject so
what we have here now then is the situation where
lines through the origin correspond to rational
numbers on the number line given a line through
the origin then you just see where it meets the
number line that would be say at the point to
this line would meet it at the 0.3 this one at the
0.4 this line at the point minus 3 at minus 5 and
so on so lines through the origin correspond
to points on the number line almost but not
quite there is one line through the origin which
does not meet this y equals 1 line and that's the
purely horizontal line the x axis that's exactly
parallel to y equals 1 so it doesn't meet it and
so it's kind of natural to start thinking well
as this point on the number line gets bigger
and bigger and bigger then it's clear that the
line through the origin is getting closer and
closer to this horizontal line so it's natural
to think about this line as representing infinity
and when we do that well the fraction 1 over 0
which is an illegal fraction gets represented by
the point 1 0 at that point right there in the in
the plane so when we talked about the stern broco
tree we saw that this vector here played a natural
role there was actually a very useful place for
this illegal fraction so we're gonna see more of
that coming up here now so the moral of the story
is that if we want to extend arithmetic from the
rational numbers to include infinity we probably
should think in terms of the projective line we
should think in terms of this two-dimensional
picture where rational numbers get represented by
lines through the origin ok that's a very good way
to think so let's shift our point of view now from
the rational numbers to integral points in the
plane there's a natural connection between the two
but they're they're differ but it'll be useful for
us to think about integer points in the plane so
this is the type so integer points we're talking
about points that are the form a comma B where
a and B are integers and let's make sure we all
understand they're integers means natural numbers
or zero or negative numbers to any one of those
three possibilities is allowed now if the second
number is not equal to 0 then we can associate
to this integral point call it P a rational number
the rational number a over B so given a point like
this an integral point where the second coordinate
is not zero then we can associate to it a rational
number okay so there's a natural connection here
which we're going to use later on but now let's
just stick with these integral points and we're
going to define some new operations where define
some new ideas well the first is not so novel
we'll call it scalar multiplication will allow
ourselves to write C times the point and by that
we mean just what you get when you multiply both
coordinates by C and C is an integer C is an
integer and a and B are integers then these two
entries are still integers so this is an integral
point and this will also be an integral point and
now we're going to introduce two new operations
on points on integral points called rational
addition and rational multiplication here are the
definitions so the sum or the rational sum of the
point a B and the Point C D is the point ad plus
BC comma BD and AD of course means a times D so
a times D plus B times C that's the first entry
and the second entry is just B times D now I hope
this looks a lot like addition to fractions to
you this is exactly what we do when we add the
fraction a over B to the fraction C over D we
get the fraction ad plus BC over B D when we're
dealing with fractions we have to insist that the
second entry is not zero because we don't want to
end up with a fraction that has a zero but at
the level of vectors we don't care about the
second entry being zero or not this definition
makes sense whether or not one or both of the
entries are zero in particular you could add
zero zero plus zero zero that would be zero zero
rational multiplication is even easier it
corresponds also to the way we multiply fractions
so a B times C D is by definition a C comma B D we
multiply the two first entries we multiply the two
2nd entries so these are just transcribing the
usual notions of addition and multiplication of
fractions to this related but different scenario
of integral vectors in the plane and we need one
more definition that's going to be important for
us we're going to define the height of an integral
point a B to be B in other words the height of the
point is just the y-coordinate which geometrically
in the plane is how high up above the x-axis it
is so now here is the main theorem to today's
lecture it's the theorem that asserts what are
the arithmetic alauda side by these operations
so the theorem is that we have three integral
points P Q and R they're integral points the
first statement is that P plus Q equals Q plus
P and P times Q equals Q times P in other words
the order that we either rationally add or
rationally multiply these two points does not
matter these are the commutative laws the next
one the associative laws they tell us that first
for addition P plus Q plus R is the same as P
plus Q plus R and for multiplication P times Q
times R equals P times Q times R so these are
of course just exactly the same laws that hold
for arithmetic with rational numbers so the third
laws are the distributive laws and here they are
and if we look at this first one if I remove this
for a moment then this looks just like the usual
distributive law P times Q plus r equals P times
Q plus P times R now what we're saying is that
in order for this to hold in this situation
we need to multiply the left-hand side by H
of P the height of P so the height of P that's
a number times P times Q plus R equals P times
Q plus P times R and similarly on the other side
if we're having P plus Q times R equals P times
R plus Q times R we have to multiply here by H of
R the height of R now you can think about this as
balancing things in some sense the the usual
distributive law has two P's on this side but
only one on this side this new distributive law
has P here but also another P over here so two
peas on both sides a similarity here so these
are completely cut and dried laws that we can
now check that they hold four integral points
with these operations of rational addition and
rational multiplication we've defined and it's an
excellent exercise for you to stop the video now
get out your pen and paper and say I'm going to
prove these I'm gonna check that these actually
really work why why are these Heights coming in
this is unfamiliar you can work it out yourself
and see how they come up that great exercise
okay so there's the exercise prove each of
these laws let me prove one or two of them for
you the trickier ones so let's have a look at
associative law for addition the law P plus Q
plus R equals P plus Q plus R so to prove this
we're going to suppose that P equals the integral
point a B Q is the integral point CD and R as the
integral point EF ABCDE and F are all integers
any integers at all okay we'll calculate the
left hand side P plus Q plus R first we need to
calculate P plus Q there's P and Q the definition
is ad plus BC comma B D there it is there we have
to multiply that by our how do we multiply these
two well we take this thing here times this one
the product of the two outside ones and add the
product of the two inside one so BD times e and
then the second element is just the product of
the second entries BD times effort fine what
about the right hand side P plus Q plus R well
there's pee again and now Q plus R is there is Q
there's R so the product is CF plus de times DF
now to add these we need to take a times D F plus
B times C F plus de that's the first entry and the
second entry is the product of B times the second
entry D F so are these two the same let's have a
look first entry here has an ADF there's an ADF
here there's a BC F term here and also BC F term
there there's a BD e term here and a BD e term
here and both second entries are equal to BD f
so that associative law holds and let's also have
a look at one of the distributive laws say this
one H of P times P times Q plus R equals P times
Q plus P times R again we'll let P Q and R be as
before and then the left hand side is H of P times
P times Q plus R so H of P is just the height of
P which is B so we're talking about B times a B
times the product of Q plus R the sum of Q plus
R is C F plus de comma D F alright and this thing
times this thing here well we just multiply the
a times the center here and then the B times this
entry here and we have to multiply all of that by
B and that means we have to multiply both terms by
B so it's expand things out so here there's an ACF
with a B and here's an ad e with a B here's a BD
f with another B means B squared EF so that's the
left hand side now the right hand side P times Q
plus P times R there's P times Q P times R so P
times Q will be AC comedy d we have to add to
that P times our product of this one with this
one so that's a comma B F so how do we add these
two we take AC x BF + BD times AE and the right
hand side is BD times bf right there so the first
term here is ABC F and then the next one is a BD e
and the second term over here we have B squared D
F and when we've written it that way we see these
two are exactly the same ABC F a BD e V Square D
F so these two terms agree and the distributive
law holds so this being somewhat novel arithmetic
it's probably good to practice it to get it more
familiar so here's some exercises calculate 2 3
+ 4 5 3 - 1 + 0 - 6 0 + 3 1 + 4 0 + 0 - 3 and a
few calculations with products - 3 times 4 5
3 - 1 times 0 - just the same ones 6 0 times
3 1 4 0 times 0 minus 3 these sums didn't have
any of the 0 0 points involved so this exercise
deals with that case so show that 0 0 plus any
point a B no matter what it is is always 0 0 and
similarly 0 0 times any point a B no matter what
it is is always 0 0 so this 0 0 point which is a
bit of a novelty perhaps it has a very simple
arithmetic 'el structure anything added to it
or multiplied with it just gives itself all right
so now we're in a in a great position to connect
this with this extended rational number arithmetic
so the the point zero 2 is going to represent for
us the fraction 0 over to the rational number
that we usually call zero but this point here
say six zero is going to represent a new kind
of extended rational number six over zero so
that's going to be acting like infinity for us
and this zero comma zero well that's something
even maybe more unfamiliar so that's a new
kind of element whose arithmetic is very
simple but which sort of plays an important
role in connecting the the arithmetic in in
completing the arithmetic so the next video we're
going to extend now to rational number arithmetic
with infinity I hope you'll join me for that
I'm norman wildberger thanks for listening
you